Add SPEC 11 on vulnerability disclosure (#391)
scientific-python/specs: spec-0011/index.md

endorsed-by:
---

## Description

This SPEC outlines the process for vulnerability disclosure. It aims to
provide clear guidelines for the identification, reporting, and remediation of
security vulnerabilities within projects.

### Core Project Endorsement

### Ecosystem Adoption

TODO: Risks in smaller projects vs risks in larger projects. This might change
strict adherence to the implementation here.

## Implementation

Security vulnerabilities should be handled quickly, and sometimes privately.
The primary goal of this process is to reduce the total time users are
vulnerable to both publicly and privately known reports.

To achieve this goal, the project should provide well-defined ways to report
vulnerabilities (e.g., special email address such as `security@<project>.com`,
forum, GitHub private security reporting, vulnerability reward programs). All
suspected vulnerabilities should be handled in accordance with
[Responsible Disclosure model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordinated_vulnerability_disclosure).
The project should provide a mechanism for researchers to submit GPG encrypted
vulnerability reports, for vulnerabilities with a higher degree of
sensitivity.

> The project should ensure that a _Security Response Team_ (SRT) exists. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project should ensure that a _Security Incident Response Team_ (SIRT) exists. This
```

SRT as abbreviation for security teams responsible for triaging and shepherding the mitigation of vulnerabilities is not widely used, [SIRT is the generally accepted term](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_emergency_response_team).

team could be shared with other projects in the same organization, or within

> the same ecosystem. SRT has the following responsibilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same ecosystem. The SIRT has the following responsibilities:
```

- Triage: assess the impact of any vulnerability. Can the vulnerability be
  replicated? Which projects are affected? What is the blast radius? Who is
  responsible for the fix? Is there a need for coordinated disclosure between
  multiple projects?
- Infrastructure: create security advisories, ensure teams working on fixing a
  vulnerability can work in private, create tests for the vulnerability and
  its variants.
- Disclosure: handle public messaging around the vulenrability by drafting an
  advisory to document the impact, how to upgrade, how to mitigate if upgrade
  is not possible.
- Release: create patch releases containing the fix and notify the public.

For each vulnerability, the SRT should follow these steps:

1. **Acknowledge the report**: The SRT should respond to any report in at most

>    24 hours. For this, there should be inventory of all the places where

Author: I agree. I should probably add that to the text too.

   vulnerabilities can be reported, and SRT should monitor all of these (via
   automation and dashboards where possible). The SRT will handle
   communication with the reporter throughout the vulnerability fixing
   process, updating the reporter on the disclosure timeline.

> 2. **Triage the vulnerability**: The SRT should attempt to reproduce the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Triage the vulnerability**: The SIRT should attempt to reproduce the
```

>    vulnerabiltiy and analyze its impact. The SRT should rate the impact and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   vulnerabiltiy and analyze its impact. The SIRT should rate the impact and
```

   consider coordinated disclosure based on
   [the traffic light protocol (TLP)](https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/news/traffic-light-protocol-tlp-definitions-and-usage).

> 3. **Assign the vulnerability fix to fixing team**: The SRT is not responsible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Assign the vulnerability fix to fixing team**: The SIRT is not responsible
```

   for fixing all vulnerabilities themselves. They should delegate to a team

>    that has the most accurate knowledge of the involved codebase. In general,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   that has the most accurate knowledge of the affected codebase. In general,
```

>    the fixing team should be formed from maintainers of the affected projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the fixing team should include maintainers from the affected projects.
```

   Depending on TLP level, other members of the project could be brought in,

>    as needed, but only after consulting the SRT.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   as needed, but only after consulting the SIRT.
```

4. **Prepare a disclosure timeline**: Judging based on severity, complexity of

>    the code base, development time, release work, dependencies on upstream,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the code base, development time, release work, upstream dependencies,
```

>    the SRT should create a timeline for when the vulnerability fix should be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the SIRT should create a timeline for when the vulnerability fix should be
```

   released and the public would be notified about the vulnerability. If the
   vulnerability has a low severity, the timeline can be extended to slow the
   release process to account for holidays, developer bandwidth, etc.

> 5. **Request and prepare a CVE**: The SRT would prepare a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. **Request and prepare a CVE**: The SIRT should prepare a
```

   [security advisory](https://docs.github.com/en/code-security/security-advisories)
   in the affected repositories and obtain CVE numbers for the
   vulnerabilities. As many details as possible should be entered into the
   advisory. Each time new information is discovered, the advisory should be

>    update. A vulnerability severity score, computed using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   updated. A vulnerability severity score, computed using
```

>    [CVSS](https://www.first.org/cvss/) should be added. Members of the fixing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   [CVSS](https://www.first.org/cvss/) should be added. Members of the remediation
```

   team should be added to the advisory, to contribute details.

> 6. **Create a private fork[^1]** for the fixing team to fix the vulnerability

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Create a private fork[^1]** for the remediation team to fix the vulnerability
```

   in private. This is a temporary fork and should be deleted once the
   vulnerability is fixed. It should only be created to ensure CI can run on
   code fixing the vulnerability without accidentally disclosing the
   vulnerability[^2].
7. **Plan and perform the patch release**. Once the fixing team has submitted

>    all necessary fixes for the vulnerability and its variants and the SRT has

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   all necessary fixes for the vulnerability and its variants and the SIRT has
```

   verified that the work is completed, the two teams agree on a release
   timeline and perform the release as well as announce the vulnerability to
   the public[^3].

> On the release day, the SRT and the fixing team:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the release day, the SIRT and the remediation team:
```

> 1. merge all the commits from the private fork into the project repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. merge all the commits from the private fork onto the project repository
```

2. start patch releases for all affected versions in the supported range
3. publish all release binaries and packages
4. publish the security advisory
5. publish an announcement that is actionable, contains mitigation steps for
   users that cannot upgrade to the newly released patched versions, and is
   distributed to a wide audience.

A template of the announcement could be:

```
Subject: Security release of $PROJECT $VERSION is now available
To: ...

Hello $PROJECT Community,

> The Security Response Team and maintainers of $PROJECT would like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Security Incident Response Team and maintainers of $PROJECT would like
```

to announce the availability of $PROJECT $VERSION.

This addresses the following CVE(s):

* CVE-YEAR-ABCDEF (CVSS score $CVSS): $CVESUMMARY
...

Upgrading to $VERSION is encouraged to fix these issues.

**Am I vulnerable?**

Run `$PROJECT --version` and if it indicates a base version of $OLDVERSION or
older that means it is a vulnerable version.

<!-- Update this for libraries that don't have a CLI capable of running
`--version` to extract version information -->

<!-- Provide details on features, extensions, configuration that make it
likely that a system is vulnerable in practice. -->

**How do I mitigate the vulnerability?**

<!-- This is an optional section. Remove if there are no mitigations. -->

**How do I upgrade?**

<!-- Outline upgrade steps (e.g., use `uv install`) -->

**Vulnerability Details**

<!-- For each CVE, provide some details of the vulnerability and link to the
advisory. -->
```

## Notes

> A few days after the release, the SRT could write a retrospective of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A few days after the release, the SIRT could write a retrospective of the
```

> vulnerability and fixing process, with details on everyone involved, links to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vulnerability and the remediation process, with details on everyone involved, links to
```
